---
layout: post
title: The Origin of the Valmiki Ramayana
joomla_id: 416
joomla_url: the-origin-of-the-valmiki-ramayana-1
date: 2012-04-30 00:56:21.000000000 +00:00
---
# The Origin of the Valmiki Ramayana by Swami Krishnananda
* * *
Created on Thursday 26 December 2013 16:26
**READ MORE \\\** T[he Origin of the Valmiki Ramayana](http://www.swami-krishnananda.org/disc/disc_191.html)
Srimad Valmiki Ramayana, which is considered as the Adi Kavya, equivalent to Veda itself, is something whose exposition it is rare to obtain. _Vedah prachetasadasit sakshat ramayanatmana_ is a famous verse which makes out that the whole of the Veda has been expounded in epic language by the Adi Kavi Valmiki in the Ramayana. The power, the force, the literary style, the mellifluous movement of the whole theme of presentation and a subtly permeating undercurrent of immortal power in the whole epic of the Ramayana make it an almost unparalleled scripture in the world.
All Sanskrit literature originated in its form as _sahitya_ from the time of Sage Valmiki himself. There was, as we are told, no versification or presentation of any subject in the form of a _sloka_ before Valmiki for the first time uttered words which became a _sloka_ [verse] though what he expressed to all is a _shoka_ [sorrow]. _Manishada pratishtatum samagah sashvatisamah yat krouncha mithunadekam sokam avadhim kama mohitam_. This seems to be the first verse ever available to us in Sanskrit literature, originated from the mouth of Valmiki Adi Kavi, who uttered these words not as a _kavi_ but as a person in distress at the sight of a fowler shooting an arrow of death-bringing strength to a male bird, _krouncha_, [dove] which was with its partner. Valmiki felt deeply grieved. “How cruel you are to bring death to a joyfully seated dove.” A curse was imprecated at once by this great sage, which he spoke in anger. That imprecation, that curse, came in the series of these words: _manishada pratishtatum samagah sashvatisamah yat krouncha mithunadekam sokam avadhim kama mohitam_. _Manishada pratishtatum samagah_: O fowler, don’t live for long. That means to say, let this be the end of your life. Why? _Yat krouncha mithunadekam sokam avadhim kama mohitam_: When the male _krouncha_ was with his partner with joy, you killed him. This is the cruelest of acts that one can deal to one who is most innocent. As you have dealt a deathblow to one of the two doves who was most innocent and not deserving of this harm, I utter this word of immediate annihilation of yourself.
When these words were uttered in a state of anger as a curse to bring death to the fowler instantaneously, Brahma the Creator descended and blessed Valmiki, the sage who uttered these words. “Glory to him who has uttered this first verse of glorification of the great Lord.” Where is the glorification of the great Lord in these words? Valmiki never knew that within the words of curse that he uttered there was a prayer to the Almighty Lord Narayana hiddenly present, unwittingly made present inside in the form of a systematic verse of thirty-two letters. Though the obvious meaning of this verse of thirty-two letters is a curse, it had another meaning altogether which was a glorification of Lakshmi-Narayana. _Manishada_: O abode of Mahalakshmi, is another meaning of these words. _Ma_ means Lakshmi, _nishada_ is one who is abode. _Pratishtatum samagah_: May your glory be forever and ever.
This is the meaning of this Sanskrit style. You can juxtapose the words this way or that way. In one way it is a death-bringing curse, and arranged in another way the very same words mean glory to Adinarayana. O abode of Mahalakshmi, may you be glorified forever and ever. Why? _Yat krouncha mithunadekam sokam avadhim kama mohitam_: Because you have been a conduit for bringing an end to Ravana, who was attached in a sensuous manner to objects. You brought an end to this crude way of living. May you live long. May you live long. May your glory be immortalised, O Narayana, the abode of Lakshmi.
“O, you have uttered these words?” Brahma immediately said, “You have started the glory of Rama, incarnation of Narayana, who came to end this tyranny of Ravana. I ordain you to write the whole epic Ramayana story from now onwards, commencing with this great glorification of Narayana.
There is also a secret behind the Adi Kavya Ramayana, which is for every thousand verses, the first verse commences with one letter of the Gayatri mantra. _Tapah svadhyaya nirataam tapasvi vagvidam varam, naradam paripapracha valmikih muni pumgavam_ is the first verse. ‘Ta’ is the first letter. _Tat savitur varenyam_ is how the Gayatri commences; and the next one thousand verses starts with the next letter of Gayatri. The twenty-four thousand verses of the Valmiki Ramayana have hiddenly, within them, at every thousandth verse, a letter of the Gayatri mantra. These verses are sometimes culled out separately as Gayatri Ramayana, and devotees recite it every day.
Valmiki Ramayana is a wondrous, immortal epic with a wondrous, immortal message. May God bless you!
[Extracted from Swami Krishnananda Maharaj's discourses Divine Life Society]
* * *
* * *
# The Gospel of the Bhagavadgita
