---
layout: post
title: Conciousness
joomla_id: 201
joomla_url: conciousness
date: 2012-05-05 20:02:24.000000000 +00:00
---
**Conciousness**
* * *  
Created on Friday, 15 February 2013 15:27
We feel that the entire universe is changing, applies to all, from the galaxies to elemental particles, there are flow of events in the forward direction as it seems. It is not possible for anything to know the change being part of the changing universe, change cannot know change. Only an un-changing entity can know that there is a changing phenomenon. The un-changing entity is the universal consciousness.
When we look into Quantum world, we find that the wave function of the light itself collapses into a particle when observed but when not observed it continues to behave like endless waves. The pre-observed state is a mass-less state for pure energy that is present everywhere in the universe (seems so spatially), cannot be isolated into any location. This phenomenon also leads to non-locality and simultaneous existence of same elemental particles like the electrons. The waves of light interfere with each other as if it is one big ocean of water, but a small part taken out of the ocean we call it a water drop. Actually there is no water drop in the ocean; the whole ocean is one big drop!
When the wave collapses into a particle, it attains a mass which creates space for its existence, in this process of creation of space; time is also created to accommodate the flow of events. So prior to wave function collapse there was no time and no space. There is no matter in the universe if the wave energy does not convert to matter. Energy – Matter conversion and vice versa is a known phenomenon now.
Space is actually something like a medium between any two or three particles (mass), when the particles disappear; the space between them also disappears. Matter only creates space and time. An analogy would be an inflated balloon, as the air molecules inflate the balloon and creates the space and volume inside the balloon. There is no space outside the surface of the balloon itself if you compare this with the universe. An insect trying to escape from inside the balloon cannot do so as there is no space available outside the balloon. That is why even light can only traverse along the outer boundary of the universe in a cervical path as it cannot travel outside the universe as there is no space available.
So before manifesting into matter, the energy is still existing but in a ‘space less and timeless’ state and this energy is infinite, unchanging which gets manifested when observed. Who is observing? The consciousness is observing and manifests this infinite energy into matter and in the process creates space and time, the matter being all galaxies made up of fundamental particles including cells that make up living organisms. If we look deeper into quantum level we will find that there are no boundaries between anything in the universe and it a space continuum and molecular densities isolate different objects.
Psychologists say that there are three levels of mind state, deep sleep, dream and wake state. In the wake state the sense organs are very active and mind perceptions are strong. In dream state they are still functional and mind creates life-like events without actual space and time. In the deep sleep state mind also stops along with sense organs. Only vital organs function. One may not know anything during this state. But when we wake up from a deep sleep we still see ourselves not changed from before going into deep sleep, but don’t know what happened during that that period. We could have even been someone else and came back to this form again, how do we know? The only connection between the time when he went into deep sleep and when he woke up is the universal consciousness that was observing us and continues similar manifestations even after we wake up. During the deep sleep state we can say that we were one with the universal consciousness and there was no energy – matter conversion or manifestation and so there was no space and time during the deep sleep state. But when one wakes up, he has actually stopped time during the deep sleep state. But he will get back to wake state where mind is influenced by manifestations, environment and usual flow of time as we have defined time.
So we can say that our mind when merges with the universal consciousness (for eg during deep sleep), it does not manifest anything, so no matter, no space, no time but pure energy in waves present in a space less timeless condition and one with that and not different (Sat chit and Chit Sat). The only way to find out this is, that we were in that state, is the unexplainable happiness you get when you get back to wake state.
The ‘Reality’ is what the mind experiences in the deep sleep state which is ‘nothing’ but pure energy in space less timeless condition. But the wake state (like just now) is more deterministic dream state; it affirms the presence of all the objects. For one in deep sleep state, everything disappears including his own vital organs and cells, but for others who are observing him they still exist as manifested by the outside observers. When the person wakes up from deep sleep, his mind again manifest the body and the cells back to wake state and connects to the conditions prior to the deep sleep state.
[Extracted from Swami Krishnanda Maharaj's discourses Divine Life Society]
* * *
  
