---
layout: post
title: Hindu Gods
joomla_id: 484
joomla_url: hindu-gods
date: 2014-03-11 17:02:00.000000000 +00:00
---
 **Hindu Gods by Swami Krishnananda**

**Baba Times Digest© | 11 March 2014 13:53 EST | New York Edition**

* * *

| 

**Hindu Gods**

**Divine Life Society Publication: -** [**Devi Mahatmya, Prounciation of Mantras, Hindu Gods**](http://www.swami-krishnananda.org/disc/disc_131.html) **by Swami Krishnananda**

Visitor: Swamiji, someone with a definite purpose of his own, in order to provoke me into an argument, remarked, "Hinduism is nothing but one god fighting with another!" I knew his mind and so refused to say anything. But what is the meaning of these so-called wars between Vishnu and Brahma, for instance, when Lord Siva vanquishes them both and quells their pride? Lord Siva establishes at the same time that He is the Most Supreme! Is it because in such contexts the Manifested God gets accretions of their level which is lower than that of the Supreme Being? The Puranas and the Epics are full of such incidents of war among the Gods.

Swamiji: The subject-object opposition in time and space, the affirmation of the ego as superior to and supreme over everything, causes the clash, no matter at what level. This clash of the positive and the negative, both of which are inherent in everything finite, produces a spark as a higher synthesis and is absorbed in the higher synthesis. But this level of the present higher synthesis is, again, not the highest. It is still only in the process of evolution into the next higher synthesis. Hence this clash and this spark are repeated, and so is the absorption of the spark into the next higher synthesis, from level to level. This clash or ‘war’ between the gods – deities of the different levels – goes on until the last higher synthesis is absorbed into the Absolute. This process of the sparks getting absorbed thus is explained in the Puranas and the Epics as one god warring with another and a third god conquering (absorbing) both within Itself.

**Excerpts from:**

**Hindu Gods -** [**Devi Mahatmya, Prounciation of Mantras, Hindu Gods**](http://www.swami-krishnananda.org/disc/disc_131.html) **by Swami Krishnananda**

  

If you would like to purchase the print edition or audio CD, visit:   
 **[The Divine Life Society E-Bookstore](http://www.dlshq.org/cgi-bin/store/commerce.cgi?category=krishnananda&cart_id=1394930528.401)**

If you would like to contribute to the dissemination of spiritual knowledge please contact the General Secretary at:**[](mailto:generalsecretary@sivanandaonline.org)[generalsecretary@sivanandaonline.org](mailto:generalsecretary@sivanandaonline.org)**



 |



* * *

[  
](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Independence_Day_%28United_States%29)

**SEND FEED BACK ON THIS ARTICLE \\\ [Email to BT Digest Editor](mailto:thebabatimes@gmail.com)**

* * *



