---
layout: post
title: 'What You Say Is the Expression of What You Are '
joomla_id: 904
joomla_url: what-you-say-is-the-expression-of-what-you-are
date: 2015-04-17 17:02:09.000000000 +00:00
---
**Spiritual Message for the Day – What You Say Is the Expression of What You Are by Gurudev Sri Swami Sivananda**
**Baba Times Digest© | 17 April 2015 17.57 EST | New York Edition**
* * *
**What You Say Is the Expression of What You Are**
**Divine Life Society Publication:** [**Ethics of The Bhagavadgita**](http://www.dlshq.org/books/es221.htm#intro) **by** [**Gurudev Sri Swami Sivananda**](http://www.dlshq.org/saints/siva.htm)
Srimad Bhagavad Gita is the Gospel of Sri Krishna. Sri Krishna is regarded as the Purna-Avatara of God. He was perfect in every respect. God is All-pervading; Sri Krishna’s life-on-earth, too, was all-comprehensive. Study Srimad Bhagavata and the Mahabharata. You will understand what a multi-faceted diamond Sri Krishna was. He was a wonderful child, divine boy, resplendent youth, dearest friend, mighty warrior, wise administrator, sweet comrade, master of diplomacy, protector of the meek, death of the wicked, preserver of Dharma, clever strategist, humble servant, obedient pupil, dutiful son, loving husband and Supreme Guru. These and countless others are but aspects of His Immanence as Krishna. Above all these, He is God Who, in His own transcendental nature, is the Lord of lords, the Father and Mother of all creation, the very Soul of all that exists. He is the Substratum of all existence. He is the Reality, immortal, eternal, infinite and absolute. He is not only immortal but Immortality Itself.
It is, therefore, in the fitness of things that the Scripture that He propounded should partake of all these great virtues that characterised His Divine Manifestation and His transcendental Nature. The Bhagavad Gita is so comprehensive that everyone can draw inspiration and guidance from it, whatever his social status may be, whatever his profession and in whatever stage of spiritual evolution he may be. For, into the Bhagavad Gita the Lord has woven a beautiful and universal pattern of ethics that would appeal and apply to all. The grand edifice of the Ethics of the Bhagavad Gita has been built on the Eternal Corner-stones of (1) Immortality of the Soul; (2) Immanence of God; (3) Impermanence of the world; (4) Immediacy of Liberation. Because these truths are universal, the Ethics of the Bhagavad Gita also have universal application.
Existing as He does as the very Immortal Principle in all beings, Lord Krishna proclaims with unimpeachable authority, the Immortality of the Soul. Being manifest here in this world as the very life and soul of all beings, He reveals the Immanence of God. Being the witness of the actions of Prakriti and the interplay of the Gunas, and in the perfect knowledge of the nature of this play of the Gunas, He declares that the objects of the world are evanescent, that all that is born must die, that all that is created must perish. Being the One who is conscious of the One Imperishable, Indivisible Truth which is never affected by the illusory play of Prakriti in which the Jiva which is essentially one with that Supreme Being dreams that he is dumb-driven and bound, the Lord asserts that Liberation is possible here and now.
The thundering revelation of the Immortality of the Soul in the Sloka: _Ajo Nityas-sasvatoyam Purano Na Hanyate Hanyamane Sarire_ warns man not to deceive himself by trying to ignore the Law of Karma, the Law of Rebirth and the Law of Retribution. The soul within him does not die with the death of the body; and, so long as it does not liberate itself by attaining Jnana, is bound to reap the harvest of the seeds it has sown in this birth--_Dhruvam_ _Janma-Mritasya._ The Jiva which imagines that it is the doer of an action is bound to it by an invisible thread called attachment. The action is a rubber ball with a long rubber band attached to it which is given to the children to play with; one end of the band is tied to the finger of the child and he throws the ball on the ground; and the ball promptly rebounds to the child’s hand. Similarly, every action performed by you with the idea that you are doing it, with a desire to attain a certain end, is bound to rebound on you sooner or later, in this birth or in another. Death itself is but going from one room to another; and so long as the band of attachment is not broken by the knife of non-attachment (_Asanga Sastrena Dridhena Chhitva_) and the knot of desire born of ignorance is not loosened; the ball of action is bound to come back. One who realises this will do no evil. It is ignorance of the immortality of the soul and the inevitable working of the law of action and reaction that makes the wicked man to go his evil way. The wise man dismisses the misfortunes that may befall him as the working out of the evil Karmas of a previous birth and is indifferent to them; and he is active in cultivating goodness and in doing good, convinced, in the words of Sri Krishna, "that the doer of good never comes by evil" and that in the life to come, he will not only be free from misery and misfortune, but will get greater opportunities of progressing more rapidly towards the goal, viz., Jnana. The doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul is, therefore, the most important corner-stone in the Gita-ethics.
The next is the revelation of the Immanence of God. God is not a cruel monarch or just a benevolent deity sitting on a golden throne in a far-away city depending for his knowledge of your actions on agents and spies. He is the Indweller of everyone. He is the Witness of your thoughts. People around you watch your actions and hear your words; God watches not only your actions, but the motives that prompt them; He hears not only your words but the whisper of your heart’s intentions. It is therefore that Lord Jesus, too, said: "Thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly." The doctrine of the Immanence of God exposes, too, the hypocrite who pretends to worship God in a shrine, ignoring the Lord walking bare-bodied on the road with a begging-bowl in hand, who is writhing in pain, groaning under subjection and groping in the darkness of ignorance--the disguises assumed by Him to test your sincerity and to give you a chance to worship Him truly, and to attain Him here and now. Look up, and see your Lord watching you through the eyes of everyone you meet. Have you got the sincerity to recognise Him? Then you are fit to realise God and your own Immortality. He is here, near you; and in order to bring this fact graphically before you, Sri Krishna describes Himself as the several manifestations set forth in the Vibhuti Yoga of the Bhagavad Gita.
The third--the doctrine of the impermanence of the world--is a stern warning against your setting too much store by the things of this world. The greatest treasure you acquire is but straw! The least that you do to the Lord immanent in all around you is the key to inexhaustible treasure. The things that you acquire are of this world which will pass away; but by the service you render to God immanent here, you are watering the plant of Immortality. Remember; the things that you possess, and the whole world; not only this world which is but a mere speck of dust in this universe, but the universe itself; not only this but countless universes that constitute creation--are but objects of a passing dream of the Supreme Being. Grabbing them is like catching hold of a cobra mistaking it for a rope to tie round the waist as belt. Great is the misery of one who takes the world as reality and runs after the pleasures of the world. Supreme Bliss is the prize that awaits one who, understanding the evanescence of the world, applies himself to Namasmarana, Japa, Kirtan, selfless service, renunciation and meditation, in short, to the life divine.
To such a one liberation is promised here and now. One, who, through knowledge of the Immortality of the Soul, the Immanence of God and the impermanence of the world, casts off attachment to the world and the actions of Prakriti, attains Liberation here and now--_Ihaiva_ _Tairjitassargo Yesham Samye Sthitam Manah, Nirdosham Hi Samam Brahma Tasmat Brahmani Te Sthitah._ Not only that; the true devotee of the Lord attains Him quite easily: _Tasyaham Sulabhah Partha Nityayuktasya Yoginah._ This doctrine of the Immediacy of Liberation, this doctrine of hope, is the great incentive to the diligent student of the Yoga of the Bhagavad Gita and is, therefore, the fourth important corner-stone of the Ethics of the Bhagavad Gita.
May the blessings of Lord Sri Krishna be upon you all! May you all attain Liberation from bondage here and now!
**Excerpts from:**  **What You Say Is the Expression of What You Are -** [**Ethics of The Bhagavadgita**](http://www.dlshq.org/books/es221.htm#intro) **by** [**Gurudev Sri Swami Sivananda**](http://www.dlshq.org/saints/siva.htm)
If you would like to purchase the print edition, visit: **[The Divine Life Society E-Bookstore](http://www.dlshq.org/download/download.htm)**
If you would like to contribute to the dissemination of spiritual knowledge please contact the General Secretary at: [](mailto:%20%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20var%20prefix%20=%20%27ma%27%20+%20%27il%27%20+%20%27to%27;%20var%20path%20=%20%27hr%27%20+%20%27ef%27%20+%20%27=%27;%20var%20addy57016%20=%20%27generalsecretary%27%20+%20%27@%27;%20addy57016%20=%20addy57016%20+%20%27sivanandaonline%27%20+%20%27.%27%20+%20%27org%27;%20document.write%28%27%3Ca%20%27%20+%20path%20+%20%27%5C%27%27%20+%20prefix%20+%20%27:%27%20+%20addy57016%20+%20%27%5C%27%3E%27%29;%20document.write%28addy57016%29;%20document.write%28%27%3C%5C/a%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%5Cn%20%3C/script%3E%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20document.write%28%27%3Cspan%20style=%5C%27display:%20none;%5C%27%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%20%3C/script%3EThis%20email%20address%20is%20being%20protected%20from%20spambots.%20You%20need%20JavaScript%20enabled%20to%20view%20it.%20%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20document.write%28%27%3C/%27%29;%20document.write%28%27span%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%20%3C/script%3E?subject=Contribution%20to%20Dissemination%20of%20Spiritual%20Knowledge) **generalsecretary@sivanandaonline.org**
****
**SEND FEED BACK ON THIS ARTICLE \\\ Email to BT Digest Editor[](mailto:%20%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20var%20prefix%20=%20%27ma%27%20+%20%27il%27%20+%20%27to%27;%20var%20path%20=%20%27hr%27%20+%20%27ef%27%20+%20%27=%27;%20var%20addy72654%20=%20%27dlsusa.org%27%20+%20%27@%27;%20addy72654%20=%20addy72654%20+%20%27gmail%27%20+%20%27.%27%20+%20%27com%27;%20document.write%28%27%3Ca%20%27%20+%20path%20+%20%27%5C%27%27%20+%20prefix%20+%20%27:%27%20+%20addy72654%20+%20%27%5C%27%3E%27%29;%20document.write%28addy72654%29;%20document.write%28%27%3C%5C/a%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%5Cn%20%3C/script%3E%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20document.write%28%27%3Cspan%20style=%5C%27display:%20none;%5C%27%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%20%3C/script%3EThis%20email%20address%20is%20being%20protected%20from%20spambots.%20You%20need%20JavaScript%20enabled%20to%20view%20it.%20%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20document.write%28%27%3C/%27%29;%20document.write%28%27span%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%20%3C/script%3E?subject=DLS%20Posts)( [dlsusa.org@gmail.com](mailto:dlsusa.org@gmail.com))**
* * *
  
If you would like to purchase the print edition, visit: [The Divine Life Society E-Bookstore](http://www.dlshq.org/download/download.htm)
If you would like to contribute to the dissemination of spiritual knowledge please contact the General Secretary at: **[generalsecretary@sivanandaonline.org](mailto:generalsecretary@sivanandaonline.org)**
**SEND FEED BACK ON THIS ARTICLE \\\**  **Email to BT Digest Editor**** [](mailto:%20%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20var%20prefix%20=%20%27ma%27%20+%20%27il%27%20+%20%27to%27;%20var%20path%20=%20%27hr%27%20+%20%27ef%27%20+%20%27=%27;%20var%20addy72654%20=%20%27dlsusa.org%27%20+%20%27@%27;%20addy72654%20=%20addy72654%20+%20%27gmail%27%20+%20%27.%27%20+%20%27com%27;%20document.write%28%27%3Ca%20%27%20+%20path%20+%20%27%5C%27%27%20+%20prefix%20+%20%27:%27%20+%20addy72654%20+%20%27%5C%27%3E%27%29;%20document.write%28addy72654%29;%20document.write%28%27%3C%5C/a%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%5Cn%20%3C/script%3E%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20document.write%28%27%3Cspan%20style=%5C%27display:%20none;%5C%27%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%20%3C/script%3EThis%20email%20address%20is%20being%20protected%20from%20spambots.%20You%20need%20JavaScript%20enabled%20to%20view%20it.%20%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20document.write%28%27%3C/%27%29;%20document.write%28%27span%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%20%3C/script%3E?subject=DLS%20Posts)****( [dlsusa.org@gmail.com](mailto:dlsusa.org@gmail.com))**  
