---
layout: post
title: 'Gandhiji: His Mission and Message '
joomla_id: 1075
joomla_url: gandhiji-his-mission-and-message
date: 2015-10-02 17:02:06.000000000 +00:00
---
**Spiritual Message for the Day – Gandhiji: His Mission and Message by Sri Swami Chidananda**
 **Baba Times Digest© | 2 October 2015 15.22 EST | New York Edition**
* * *
| 
**Gandhiji: His Mission and Message**
**Divine Life Society Publication:** [**Gandhiji: His Mission and Message**](http://www.dlshq.org/discourse/oct2000.htm) **by** [**Sri Swami Chidananda**](http://www.dlshq.org/saints/chida.htm)
Om! Om! Om!
Today is a day of great auspiciousness and great significance in that it is that memorable day on which the Lord gave to us more than eighty years ago a glorious gift in the form of a blessed and glorious son of His, a son, who was the embodiment of all the great divine virtues which flow forth from the seat of Godhead, the virtue of wonderful compassion, the virtue of absolute purity, the virtue of absolute truthfulness and loyalty and Dharma, all of which go to make a man almost divine. For, this is that day upon which [Mahatma Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi](http://www.dlshq.org/saints/gandhi.htm) saw the light of the day in fortunate and proud Rajkot in Saurashtra.
We call it a blessed and glorious day, because through his advent into this world, he created a wave of a renascent Dharma, of a new view of things, a new and sublime sense of values, and a new attitude towards human life and man’s activities upon this physical, eternal world. Mahatmaji, the great soul as he came to be rightly revered in later years, became to India, and through the Indian context to the world at large, a symbol of the good, the glorious, the noble and the near-on-divine. This living symbol of loftiness, of Daivee-Sampat or divine Aiswaryas became the source and fountainhead of a new conception of life in the hearts of the peoples of Bharatavarsha. He gave to India a new pattern of individual as well as public, personal as well as collective, social, as well as political living. This pattern which Mahatma Gandhi gave was one based upon the Sanatana Dharma, upon the purest essence of all great religions. For he was a man endowed with a great breadth of vision and a great universality of vision, and this vision he worked into the pattern which he gave to India and to the world through his own glorious personal life.
This day, we recall with very deep gratitude the gift, which God bestowed upon us, and also the services which Mahatmaji, the Father of the Nation, himself lovingly and spontaneously gave to the last day of his life for the renaissance of Dharma and the regeneration of Bharatavarsha, and for the establishment of permanent peace in this world, through his great doctrine of Ahimsa in all spheres of human activity. The most effective way, in which we can express our gratitude and pay back at least a part of our indebtedness to any great soul, is by keeping the ideal set by him before us vividly before our mind’s eye and also by trying to the best of each one’s ability to conform to that pattern and to follow in his foot steps.
Therefore, by recalling upon this memorable day what Gandhiji stood for, lived for we shall be able to be inspired and filled with an inner strength and urge to strive a little more earnestly and with greater sincerity to make ourselves also a little model of the ideal, which he has placed before us. Though outwardly the activities of the great soul were in the sphere of the nation’s politics to a great extent, underneath it all this activity, his quest was after Truth. He was a great Karma Yogi, who regarded all activity as worship and thus through his worshipful activity he sought to realise the Truth enshrined in the heart of all, the lowly, the downtrodden, the oppressed, the depressed. Thus it was that his entire life’s activity constituted his Sadhana for the realisation of Truth, his Yoga for the realisation of the Truth immanent in the whole world.
Once we are able to realise this great fact of Mahatmaji’s life, we shall be able to understand the apparent paradox of his mixing such absolutely unpolitical elements as Ram-Nam, Gita, Prayer and such apparently spiritual and religious factors into his life. For the true Hindu, all life, whatever sphere it may occupy—social, political, business or anything else—was but a means to the eternal end. The entire genius of Hindu culture is that man’s life in this world is regarded as a means for the attainment of the spiritual goal, for which he has been given this rare human birth. This view was already there deep-rooted in the heart of Mahatmaji. Therefore, he knew his life was but a means of attaining the supreme Realisation. He chose politics as the special type of means for attaining this end. Therefore, we find that his entire life, personal as well as public, was based upon the bedrock of the fundamentals of Sanatana Dharma.
For, the guiding scripture of Mahatmaji’s life was the supreme universal scripture—The Srimad Bhagavad Gita. Basing his life upon the Gospel of the Gita throughout his life, he clung to that two-lettered Taraka Mantra, the Divine Ram-Nam. People were puzzled to know whether Mahatmaji was a politician, whether he was a doctor of the body, mind or soul, whether he was a social reformer, or moral reformer—what he was people did not understand. When they approached Gandhiji deeply, they found that he was a man-of-God. He was a seeker supreme; he was a devotee and a Yogi. For, his source of strength, of intuition and of his wondrous peace and sublime calmness, the tranquillity which he always created wherever he went, lay in Ram-Nam. To everyone he said: "If you are facing an insurmountable difficulty or problem, take recourse to Ram-Nam; and Ram-Nam will come to your rescue. That divine word will ultimately bestow upon you happiness and welfare”.
In addition to basing his life upon the Gospel of the Gita and clinging to the sacred Ram-Nam through the thick and thin of the struggle of life, sunshine and rain, through all troubles and difficulties throughout his life, another sublime mode of ever keeping contact with the Goal of Self-realisation, with the Indwelling Truth, he gave to man in the form of his daily prayer. Mahatmaji was a man of prayer and throughout his life, throughout the most stormy periods of his political career, wherever he might have been in jail or outside, travelling and in whatever condition or state of health, his body might have been, never for a single day did he miss his daily prayer. Food he might miss; rest he might miss; and all comforts of the physical body he might miss; but this nourishment to the soul, this fresh communion with the Eternal Reality, the Indwelling Truth, he never, missed even for a single day.
By this three-fold means he has given to the whole of Bharatavarsha as well as to the world, a true pattern of a seeker’s life. Thus, we see that under the surface of apparent activity the real fact of the Mahatma was the factor of his being a true seeker, a lover of God, a devotee, a man of prayer, a man of faith in the divine name and a man following in the footsteps of the great gospel of the Blessed Lord.
Throughout his life he was firm in his adherence to the three cosmic principles of perfect purity, perfect truthfulness and perfect harmlessness, even to the least of the Lord’s creatures. He was ever firm in his adherence to the universal laws which form the fundamental unifying basis of all the faiths, religions, all cults and creeds. To show these universal laws, he became a living embodiment, a perfect personification of these three fundamental virtues throughout his life; and ceaselessly, at every opportunity, he has been advocating a life based upon Ahimsa, Satyam and Brahmacharya. Thus we find that this is the pattern and this is the way of realisation through Ahimsa, Satyam and Brahmacharya; through prayer through the practice of the Divine Name and through following the religion of worshipful action—it is this pattern that Mahatmaji gave the world through his exemplary life. We are heirs to this great ideal, which he has bestowed in his turn as a boon to humanity.
Therefore, let us pray to the Lord as well as to Mahatmaji and the other saints and sages and the Prophets, who are eternal, that we may also prove worthy of this great heritage left to us by this great soul and that we may be able to live up to this sublime pattern and make ourselves also real seekers, devotees, remaining firm in the adherence to the universal virtues and ever devotedly practising the Divine Name and living a life of worshipful activity, and that we may also be fortunate enough to realise the Supreme purpose for which we have been born as human beings upon this earth.
**Excerpts from:** [**Gandhiji: His Mission and Message**](http://www.dlshq.org/discourse/oct2000.htm) **by** [**Sri Swami Chidananda**](http://www.dlshq.org/saints/chida.htm)
 |
If you would like to purchase the print edition, visit: **[The Divine Life Society E-Bookstore](http://www.dlshq.org/download/download.htm)**
If you would like to contribute to the dissemination of spiritual knowledge please contact the General Secretary at: [](mailto:%20%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20var%20prefix%20=%20%27ma%27%20+%20%27il%27%20+%20%27to%27;%20var%20path%20=%20%27hr%27%20+%20%27ef%27%20+%20%27=%27;%20var%20addy57016%20=%20%27generalsecretary%27%20+%20%27@%27;%20addy57016%20=%20addy57016%20+%20%27sivanandaonline%27%20+%20%27.%27%20+%20%27org%27;%20document.write%28%27%3Ca%20%27%20+%20path%20+%20%27%5C%27%27%20+%20prefix%20+%20%27:%27%20+%20addy57016%20+%20%27%5C%27%3E%27%29;%20document.write%28addy57016%29;%20document.write%28%27%3C%5C/a%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%5Cn%20%3C/script%3E%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20document.write%28%27%3Cspan%20style=%5C%27display:%20none;%5C%27%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%20%3C/script%3EThis%20email%20address%20is%20being%20protected%20from%20spambots.%20You%20need%20JavaScript%20enabled%20to%20view%20it.%20%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20document.write%28%27%3C/%27%29;%20document.write%28%27span%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%20%3C/script%3E?subject=Contribution%20to%20Dissemination%20of%20Spiritual%20Knowledge) **generalsecretary@sivanandaonline.org**
****
**SEND FEED BACK ON THIS ARTICLE \\\ Email to BT Digest Editor[](mailto:%20%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20var%20prefix%20=%20%27ma%27%20+%20%27il%27%20+%20%27to%27;%20var%20path%20=%20%27hr%27%20+%20%27ef%27%20+%20%27=%27;%20var%20addy72654%20=%20%27dlsusa.org%27%20+%20%27@%27;%20addy72654%20=%20addy72654%20+%20%27gmail%27%20+%20%27.%27%20+%20%27com%27;%20document.write%28%27%3Ca%20%27%20+%20path%20+%20%27%5C%27%27%20+%20prefix%20+%20%27:%27%20+%20addy72654%20+%20%27%5C%27%3E%27%29;%20document.write%28addy72654%29;%20document.write%28%27%3C%5C/a%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%5Cn%20%3C/script%3E%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20document.write%28%27%3Cspan%20style=%5C%27display:%20none;%5C%27%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%20%3C/script%3EThis%20email%20address%20is%20being%20protected%20from%20spambots.%20You%20need%20JavaScript%20enabled%20to%20view%20it.%20%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20document.write%28%27%3C/%27%29;%20document.write%28%27span%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%20%3C/script%3E?subject=DLS%20Posts)( [dlsusa.org@gmail.com](mailto:dlsusa.org@gmail.com))**
* * *
  
If you would like to purchase the print edition, visit: [The Divine Life Society E-Bookstore](http://www.dlshq.org/download/download.htm)
If you would like to contribute to the dissemination of spiritual knowledge please contact the General Secretary at: **[generalsecretary@sivanandaonline.org](mailto:generalsecretary@sivanandaonline.org)**
**SEND FEED BACK ON THIS ARTICLE \\\**  **Email to BT Digest Editor**** [](mailto:%20%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20var%20prefix%20=%20%27ma%27%20+%20%27il%27%20+%20%27to%27;%20var%20path%20=%20%27hr%27%20+%20%27ef%27%20+%20%27=%27;%20var%20addy72654%20=%20%27dlsusa.org%27%20+%20%27@%27;%20addy72654%20=%20addy72654%20+%20%27gmail%27%20+%20%27.%27%20+%20%27com%27;%20document.write%28%27%3Ca%20%27%20+%20path%20+%20%27%5C%27%27%20+%20prefix%20+%20%27:%27%20+%20addy72654%20+%20%27%5C%27%3E%27%29;%20document.write%28addy72654%29;%20document.write%28%27%3C%5C/a%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%5Cn%20%3C/script%3E%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20document.write%28%27%3Cspan%20style=%5C%27display:%20none;%5C%27%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%20%3C/script%3EThis%20email%20address%20is%20being%20protected%20from%20spambots.%20You%20need%20JavaScript%20enabled%20to%20view%20it.%20%3Cscript%20type=%27text/javascript%27%3E%20%3C%21--%20document.write%28%27%3C/%27%29;%20document.write%28%27span%3E%27%29;%20//--%3E%20%3C/script%3E?subject=DLS%20Posts)****( [dlsusa.org@gmail.com](mailto:dlsusa.org@gmail.com))**  
