---
layout: post
title: Yoga as exercise or alternative medicine
joomla_id: 170
joomla_url: yoga-as-exercise-or-alternative-medicine
date: 2012-05-05 20:02:24.000000000 +00:00
---
<h1 style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-size: 14pt; font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; color: #000000;">Yoga as exercise or alternative medicine</span></h1>
<hr />
<p><span style="font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;"><span style="color: #000000;">Yoga</span> is a term for a range of traditional systems of <span style="color: #000000;">physical exercise</span>&nbsp;and <span style="color: #000000;">meditation</span> in <span style="color: #000000;">Hinduism</span>.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">Modified versions of the physical exercises in <span style="color: #000000;">hatha yoga</span> have become popular as a kind of low-impact physical exercise, and are used for therapeutic purposes."Yoga" in this sense and in common parlance refers primarily to the <span style="color: #000000;">asanas</span> but less commonly to <span style="color: #000000;">pranayama</span>. Aspects of <span style="color: #000000;">meditation</span> are sometimes included.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">Both the meditative and the exercise components of yoga show promise for <span style="color: #000000;">non-specific</span> health benefits. According to an article in the Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, the system of <span style="color: #000000;">hatha yoga</span> believes that <span style="color: #000000;">prana</span>, or healing "life energy" is absorbed into the body through the breath, and can treat a wide variety of illnesses and complaints.<sup><a href="#cite_note-5"><span style="color: #000000;"></span></a></sup></span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">Yoga has been studied as an intervention for many conditions, including back pain, <span style="color: #000000;">stress</span>, and <span style="color: #000000;">depression</span>.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">A survey released in December 2008 by the US <span style="color: #000000;">National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine</span> found that yoga was the sixth most commonly used alternative therapy in the United States during 2007, with 6.1 percent of the population participating.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">Yoga came to the attention of an educated western public in the mid 19th century along with other topics of <span style="color: #000000;">Hindu philosophy</span>. New schools of yoga were introduced in the context of <span style="color: #000000;">Hindu revivalism</span> towards the end of the 19th century. The first Hindu teacher to actively advocate and disseminate aspects of yoga to a western audience was <span style="color: #000000;">Swami Vivekananda</span>, who toured Europe and the United States in the 1890s</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">The physical asana of <span style="color: #000000;">hatha yoga</span> have a tradition that goes back to the 15th century, but they were not widely practiced in India prior to the early 20th century. Hatha yoga was advocated by a number of late 19th to early 20th century gurus in India, including Sri Krishnamacharya in south India, <span style="color: #000000;">Swami Sivananda</span> in the north, Sri Yogendra in Bombay, and Swami Kuvalyananda in Lonavala.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">In the 1960s, western interest in Hindu spirituality reached its peak, giving rise to a great number of <span style="color: #000000;">Neo-Hindu</span> schools specifically advocated to a western public. Among the teachers of hatha yoga who were active in the west in this period were <span style="color: #000000;">B.K.S. Iyengar</span>, <span style="color: #000000;">K. Pattabhi Jois</span>, <span style="color: #000000;">Swami Vishnu-devananda</span>, and <span style="color: #000000;">Swami Satchidananda</span>. A second "yoga boom" followed in the 1980s, as <span style="color: #000000;">Dean Ornish</span>, a follower of <span style="color: #000000;">Swami Satchidananda</span>, connected yoga to heart health, legitimizing yoga as a purely physical system of health exercises outside of <span style="color: #000000;">counter culture</span> or <span style="color: #000000;">esotericism</span> circles, and unconnected to a religious denomination.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">Since then, yoga has been used as supplementary therapy for diverse conditions such as <span style="color: #000000;">cancer</span>, <span style="color: #000000;">diabetes</span>, <span style="color: #000000;">asthma</span>, and <span style="color: #000000;">AIDS</span>. The scope of medical issues where yoga is used as a complementary therapy continues to grow.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">There are many different styles and disciplines and people practice yoga for a variety of reasons. One of the main goals of yoga is to improve overall well-being through teaching discipline and self-regulation. Recently, research has focused on the healing properties of yoga and how it relates to <span style="color: #000000;">positive psychology</span>. Researchers wonder what psychological advantages it can afford, in addition to the previously discovered physical benefits. Yoga has proven to offer different and multiple benefits for individuals ranging from consciousness of one's body and its capabilities, satisfaction from challenging oneself physically, and increased energy and mental clarity and concentration. While the topic is still somewhat new and some research is still preliminary, results have shown significant improvements in both physical and mental health among a variety of subjects in various circumstances.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">The practice of yoga traditionally includes both meditation and exercise, but in the West the focus is mainly on exercise. The more classical approaches, such as <span style="color: #000000;">Iyengar Yoga</span>, move at a more deliberate pace, emphasize proper alignment and execution and hold asanas for a longer time. They aim to gradually improve flexibility, balance, and strength. Other approaches, such as <span style="color: #000000;">Ashtanga</span> or <span style="color: #000000;">Power Yoga</span>, shift between asanas quickly and energetically. More recently, contemporary approaches to yoga have developed [(such as Vanda Scaravelli inspired, as taught by the likes of Diane Long, Sophie Hoare and Marc Woolford)], inviting students to become their own authority in yoga practice by offering principle-based approaches to yoga that can be applied to any form.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">Nearly all types of yoga practices include <span style="color: #000000;">asanas</span>, <span style="color: #000000;">pranayama</span> (breathing exercises), and <span style="color: #000000;">savasanas</span> (relaxation techniques).</span></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p><span style="font-family: trebuchet ms,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #808080;"><span style="color: #000000;">[Source]</span><br /></span></p>
<hr />
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
