---
layout: post
title: Applications of Yoga
joomla_id: 171
joomla_url: applications-of-yoga
date: 2012-05-05 20:02:24.000000000 +00:00
---
<h2 style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-size: 14pt; font-family: verdana,geneva;" class="mw-headline"><span style="color: windowtext;">Applications</span> of Yoga</span><span style="font-size: 12pt; font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; color: windowtext;"></span></h2>
<hr />
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">Yoga is a term for a range of traditional systems of physical exercise&nbsp;and meditation in Hinduism.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">Modified versions of the physical exercises in hatha yoga have become popular as a kind of low-impact physical exercise, and are used for therapeutic purposes."Yoga" in this sense and in common parlance refers primarily to the asanas but less commonly to pranayama. Aspects of meditation are sometimes included.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">Both the meditative and the exercise components of yoga show promise for non-specific health benefits. According to an article in the Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, the system of hatha yoga believes that prana, or healing "life energy" is absorbed into the body through the breath, and can treat a wide variety of illnesses and complaints.<sup><a href="#cite_note-5"></a></sup></span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">Yoga has been studied as an intervention for many conditions, including back pain, stress, and depression.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">A survey released in December 2008 by the US National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine found that yoga was the sixth most commonly used alternative therapy in the United States during 2007, with 6.1 percent of the population participating.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">Yoga came to the attention of an educated western public in the mid 19th century along with other topics of Hindu philosophy. New schools of yoga were introduced in the context of Hindu revivalism towards the end of the 19th century. The first Hindu teacher to actively advocate and disseminate aspects of yoga to a western audience was Swami Vivekananda, who toured Europe and the United States in the 1890s</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">The physical asana of hatha yoga have a tradition that goes back to the 15th century, but they were not widely practiced in India prior to the early 20th century. Hatha yoga was advocated by a number of late 19th to early 20th century gurus in India, including Sri Krishnamacharya in south India, Swami Sivananda in the north, Sri Yogendra in Bombay, and Swami Kuvalyananda in Lonavala.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">In the 1960s, western interest in Hindu spirituality reached its peak, giving rise to a great number of Neo-Hindu schools specifically advocated to a western public. Among the teachers of hatha yoga who were active in the west in this period were B.K.S. Iyengar, K. Pattabhi Jois, Swami Vishnu-devananda, and Swami Satchidananda. A second "yoga boom" followed in the 1980s, as Dean Ornish, a follower of Swami Satchidananda, connected yoga to heart health, legitimizing yoga as a purely physical system of health exercises outside of counter culture or esotericism circles, and unconnected to a religious denomination.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">Since then, yoga has been used as supplementary therapy for diverse conditions such as cancer, diabetes, asthma, and AIDS. The scope of medical issues where yoga is used as a complementary therapy continues to grow.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">There are many different styles and disciplines and people practice yoga for a variety of reasons. One of the main goals of yoga is to improve overall well-being through teaching discipline and self-regulation. Recently, research has focused on the healing properties of yoga and how it relates to positive psychology. Researchers wonder what psychological advantages it can afford, in addition to the previously discovered physical benefits. Yoga has proven to offer different and multiple benefits for individuals ranging from consciousness of one's body and its capabilities, satisfaction from challenging oneself physically, and increased energy and mental clarity and concentration. While the topic is still somewhat new and some research is still preliminary, results have shown significant improvements in both physical and mental health among a variety of subjects in various circumstances.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">The practice of yoga traditionally includes both meditation and exercise, but in the West the focus is mainly on exercise. The more classical approaches, such as Iyengar Yoga, move at a more deliberate pace, emphasize proper alignment and execution and hold asanas for a longer time. They aim to gradually improve flexibility, balance, and strength. Other approaches, such as Ashtanga or Power Yoga, shift between asanas quickly and energetically. More recently, contemporary approaches to yoga have developed [(such as Vanda Scaravelli inspired, as taught by the likes of Diane Long, Sophie Hoare and Marc Woolford)], inviting students to become their own authority in yoga practice by offering principle-based approaches to yoga that can be applied to any form.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">Nearly all types of yoga practices include asanas, pranayama (breathing exercises), and savasanas(relaxation techniques).</span></p>
<h3><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;"><span class="mw-headline">Anxiety and depression</span></span></h3>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">The effect of yoga on symptoms of anxiety and depression is one of the most well-studied aspects of yoga's effect on the body and mind. Although researchers are optimistic about the effectiveness of yoga in alleviating depression, a 2010 review of research says that studies to date, while suggestive, are not yet conclusive. However, some research says that regular yoga practice (at least once weekly) helps to decrease levels of depression significantly. Twice weekly yoga practice for two months showed a significant decrease in levels of depression as well as levels of both state and trait anxiety. Some studies also indicate that hatha yoga has a significant effect on lowering levels of anxiety and accompanying stress. Hatha yoga encourages an increased awareness of breath, internal centering, <span style="color: windowtext;">relaxation</span>, and meditation. These strategies helped participants experience significantly lower stress and anxiety levels in addition to higher <span style="color: windowtext;">quality of life</span> scores.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">A rigorous randomized control trial on yoga in literature comparing kundalini yoga with the relaxation response and mindfulness meditation in obsessive-compulsive disorder patients found a significant treatment difference in favor of kundalini yoga. Moreover, a 2005 systematic review of the research on yoga and anxiety presented encouraging results, particularly with anxiety-related disorders such as obsessive-compulsive disorder. Similarly, a present study assessed state anxiety, depressive mood, and subjective well-being and analyses of variance for repeated measures revealed mood improvement following yoga sessions. Other studies have shown that yoga practices reduce anxiety and depression, all the while improving well-being.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">In terms of its effects on individuals in educational institutions, recent research has found that yoga benefits students, not only in reducing basal anxiety levels, but also in attenuating further increases in anxiety as they experience stressful situations like exams. Additionally, differences in mood before and after class of college students taking different courses (swimming, body conditioning, hatha yoga, fencing exercise, and lecture) were analyzed and results suggest that courses which meet four requirements involving aerobics, noncompetitiveness, predictability, and repetitiveness may reduce stress.</span></p>
<h2 style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;"><span class="mw-headline"><span style="color: windowtext;">Controversy</span></span><span style="color: windowtext;"></span></span></h2>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">In regard to the practice of yoga itself, especially hatha (physically active) yoga, there are controversies over the legitimacy of "prescribing" yoga for individuals afflicted with particular conditions due to the risk of injury associated with the practice. There have been reports of yoga-related injuries and this is one reason why the practice of yoga as alternative therapy is questioned. These include <span style="color: windowtext;">carotid artery</span> tears, bulging <span style="color: windowtext;">intervertebral disc</span><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intervertebral_disc" title="Intervertebral disc"><span style="color: windowtext;">s</span></a>, <span style="color: windowtext;">rotator cuff</span> injuries, <span style="color: windowtext;">ganglion cysts</span>, compression of the spine (<span style="color: windowtext;">vertebral column</span>), <span style="color: windowtext;">vertebral artery dissection</span>, and hyperextension of the <span style="color: windowtext;">neck</span>. According to Gary Kraftsow, author of <i>Yoga for Transformation</i>, many asanas aren't suitable for everyone. <span style="color: windowtext;">Orthopedic</span> surgeon Jeffrey Halbrecht, medical director for the Institute for <span style="color: windowtext;">Arthroscopy</span> and <span style="color: windowtext;">Sports Medicine</span> in San Francisco, warns that both experienced and novice yoga practitioners can experience injuries. "Yoga is marketed as such an innocuous thing," says Loren Fishman, assistant clinical professor of rehabilitation medicine at Columbia University in New York City. "But without care, injuries can absolutely happen." 'Strenuous' yoga has been connected to a form of <span style="color: windowtext;">stroke</span> in young women. Practice of yoga has also been linked to causing hyperextension or rotation of the neck, which may be a precipitating factor in <span style="color: windowtext;">cervical artery dissection</span>.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt;">While much of the medical community views the results of yoga research to be significant, others argue that there were many flaws that undermine results. Much of the research on yoga has been in the form of preliminary studies or clinical trials of low methodological quality, including small sample sizes, inadequate blinding, lack of randomization, and high risk of bias. As of 2011, evidence suggests that yoga may be at least as effective at improving health outcomes as other forms of mild physical exercise when added to standard care. What is found most concerning regarding the legitimacy of yoga as a method of healing is the current lack of specificity and standardization regarding the practice of yoga. One recent study examined the difficulties of implementing yoga-based therapies and methods of healing without any detailed, standardized and vetted descriptions of the asanas promoted as being beneficial for healing. This research calls for the creation of supported intervention practices that could be distributed and applied for use in clinical practice for patients.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: trebuchet ms,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #808080;"><span style="color: #000000;">[Source]</span><br /></span></p>
<hr />
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
