---
layout: post
title: Reiki - History
joomla_id: 174
joomla_url: reiki-history
date: 2012-05-05 20:02:24.000000000 +00:00
---
<h1 style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-size: 14pt; font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; color: windowtext;">Reiki - History</span></h1>
<hr />
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">The <span style="color: #000000;">English</span> word reiki derives from the <span style="color: #000000;">Japanese loanword</span> reiki, meaning "mysterious atmosphere"), which derives from the <span style="color: #000000;">Chinese loanword</span> língqì ("supernatural influence"). Its earliest recorded usage in English dates to 1975. Instead of the usual <span style="color: #000000;">transliteration</span>, some English-language authors pseudo-translate reiki as "universal life energy".</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">Reiki is commonly written as in <span style="color: #000000;">shinjitai</span> <span style="color: #000000;">kanji</span> or as in <span style="color: #000000;">katakana</span> syllabary. It <span style="color: #000000;">compounds</span> the words rei: "spirit, miraculous, divine") and ki ("gas, vital energy, breath of life, consciousness"). The ki (better known as Chinese <span style="color: #000000;">qi</span> or ch'i) in reiki is understood as meaning "<span style="color: #000000;">spiritual energy</span>; vital energy; <span style="color: #000000;">life force</span>; energy of life". Some reiki translation equivalents from Japanese-English dictionaries are: "feeling of mystery", "an atmosphere (feeling) of mystery", and "an ethereal atmosphere (that prevails in the sacred precincts of a shrine); (feel, sense) a spiritual (divine) presence." Besides the usual Sino-Japanese pronunciation reiki, these kanji have an alternate Japanese reading, namely ryōge, meaning "demon; ghost" (especially in <span style="color: #000000;">spirit possession</span>).</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;"><span style="color: #000000;">Chinese</span> língqì was first recorded in the (ca. 320 BCE) Neiye "Inward Training" section of the <span style="color: #000000;">Guanzi</span>, describing early <span style="color: #000000;">Daoist</span> meditation techniques. "That mysterious vital energy within the mind: One moment it arrives, the next it departs. So fine, there is nothing within it; so vast, there is nothing outside it. We lose it because of the harm caused by mental agitation."<sup> </sup><span style="color: #000000;">Standard Chinese</span> língqì is translated by Chinese-English dictionaries as: "(of beautiful mountains) spiritual influence or atmosphere"; "1. intelligence; power of understanding; 2. supernatural power or force in fairy tales; miraculous power or force"; and "1. spiritual influence (of mountains/etc.); 2. ingeniousness; cleverness".</span></p>
<p style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-size: 12pt; font-family: verdana,geneva; color: #000000;">(<i>Mikao Usui</i>)<br /></span></p>
<p style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-size: 12pt; font-family: verdana,geneva; color: #000000;">Origins</span></p>
<p style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-size: 12pt; font-family: verdana,geneva; color: #000000;">The system of Reiki was developed by <span style="color: #000000;">Mikao Usui</span> in 1922 whilst performing Isyu Guo, a twenty-one day Buddhist training course held on Mount Kurama It is not known for certain what Usui was required to do during this training, though it most likely involved <span style="color: #000000;">meditation</span>, <span style="color: #000000;">fasting</span>, <span style="color: #000000;">chanting</span>, and <span style="color: #000000;">prayer</span> It is claimed that by a mystical revelation, Usui had gained the knowledge and spiritual power to apply and attune others to what he called Reiki, which entered his body through his crown Chakra <span style="text-decoration: underline;"></span>In April 1922, Usui moved to <span style="color: #000000;">Tokyo</span> and founded the Usui Reiki Ryōhō Gakkai in Traditional Mandarin, meaning Usui's Spiritual Energy Therapy Method Society) in order to continue treating people on a large scale with Reiki</span></p>
<p style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-size: 12pt; font-family: verdana,geneva; color: #000000;">According to the inscription on his memorial stone, Usui taught his system of Reiki to over 2000 people during his lifetime, and sixteen of these students continued their training to reach the <span style="color: #000000;">Shinpiden</span> level, a level equivalent to the Western third, or Master/Teacher, degree. While teaching Reiki in <span style="color: #000000;">Fukuyama</span> (Fukuyama-shi), Usui suffered a stroke and died on 9 March 1926.</span></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p><span style="font-family: trebuchet ms,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #808080;"><span style="color: #000000;">[Source]</span><br /></span></p>
<hr />
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
