---
layout: post
title: Health - Public
joomla_id: 176
joomla_url: health-public
date: 2012-05-05 20:02:24.000000000 +00:00
---
<h1 style="line-height: normal;"><strong><span style="font-size: 14pt; font-family: 'Verdana','sans-serif'; color: windowtext;">Public health</span></strong></h1>
<hr />
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">Public health is "the science and art of preventing disease, prolonging life and promoting health through the organized efforts and informed choices of society, organizations, public and private, communities and individuals" (1920, C.E.A. Winslow). It is concerned with threats to health based on population health analysis. The population in question can be as small as a handful of people or as large as all the inhabitants of several continents (for instance, in the case of a pandemic). The dimensions of health can encompass "a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity", as defined by the United Nations' World Health Organization. Public health incorporates the interdisciplinary approaches of epidemiology, biostatistics and health services. Environmental health, community health, behavioral health, health economics, public policy and occupational health are other important subfields.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">The focus of public health intervention is to improve health and quality of life through the prevention and treatment of disease and other physical and mental health conditions, through surveillance of cases and the promotion of healthy behaviors. Promotion of hand washing and breastfeeding, delivery of vaccinations, and distribution of condoms to control the spread of sexually transmitted diseases are examples of common public health measures.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">Modern public health practice requires multidisciplinary teams of professionals including physicians specialising in public health/community medicine/infectious disease, epidemiologists, biostatisticians, public<a href="#Public_Health_Nursing" title="Nursing"><span style="color: #000000;"> </span></a>health nurses, medical microbiologists, environmental health officers, dental hygienists, dietitians and nutritionists, health inspectors, veterinarians, public health engineers, public health lawyers, sociologists, community development workers, communications officers, and others. </span></p>
<h2 style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;"><span class="mw-headline"><span style="font-weight: normal;">Objectives</span></span><span style="font-weight: normal;"></span></span></h2>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">The focus of a public health intervention is to prevent and manage diseases, injuries and other health conditions through surveillance of cases and the promotion of healthy behaviors, communities and environments. Many diseases are preventable through simple, non-medical methods. For example, research has shown that the simple act of hand washing with soap can prevent many contagious diseases. In other cases, treating a disease or controlling a pathogen can be vital to preventing its spread to others, such as during an outbreak of infectious disease, or contamination of food or water supplies. Public health communications programs, vaccination programs, and distribution of condoms are examples of common public health measures. Measures such as these have contributed greatly to the health of populations and increases in life expectancy.</span></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p><span style="font-family: trebuchet ms,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #808080;"><span style="color: #000000;">[Source]</span><br /></span></p>
<hr />
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
