---
layout: post
title: Festivals - Ganesh Pooja
joomla_id: 72
joomla_url: festivals-ganesh-pooja
date: 2012-05-05 20:02:24.000000000 +00:00
---
<p><strong><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 14pt; color: #000000;">Ganesha Pooja</span></strong></p>
<hr />
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">Two to three months before Ganesh Chaturthi, artistic plaster of Paris (originally clay) models of Lord Ganesha are made for sale by specially skilled artisans. They are beautifully decorated and depict Lord Ganesh in poses. The size of these statues may vary from 3/4 of an inch to over 70 feet.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">Ganesh Chaturthi starts with the installation of these Ganesh statues in colorfully decorated homes and specially erected temporary structures <span style="text-decoration: none;">mandapas</span> (<span style="text-decoration: none;">pandals</span>) in every locality. The pandals are erected by the people or a specific society or locality or group by collecting monetary contributions. The pandals are decorated specially for the festival, either by using decorative items like flower garlands, lights, etc. or are theme based decorations, which depict religious themes or current events.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">The priest, usually clad in red or white <span style="text-decoration: none;">dhoti</span> and <span style="text-decoration: none;">uttariyam</span> (Shawl), then symbolically invokes life into the statue by chanting <span style="text-decoration: none;">mantras</span>. This ritual is the Pranapratishhtha. After this the ritual called as Shhodashopachara (16 ways of paying tribute) follows. Coconut, jaggery, 21 modakas, 21 durva (trefoil) blades of grass and red flowers are offered. The statue is anointed with red unguent, typically </span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">In Andhra, kudumu (rice flour dumplings stuffed with coconut and jaggery mixture), Vundrallu (steamed coarsely grounded rice flour balls), Panakam (jaggery, black pepper and cardamom flavored drink), Vadapappu (soaked and moong lentils), Chalividi (cooked rice flour and jaggery mixture), etc., are offered to Ganesha along with Modakams. These offerings to god are called Naivedyam in Telugu.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">In Andhra, Clay Ganesh (Matti Vinayakudu in <span style="text-decoration: none;">Telugu</span>) and Turmeric Ganesh (Siddhi Vinayakudu in <span style="text-decoration: none;">Telugu</span>) is usually worshiped at homes along with plaster of paris Ganesha.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">Public celebrations of the festival are hugely popular, with local communities (mandalas) vying with each other to put up the biggest statue and the best pandal. The festival is also the time for cultural activities like singing and theater performances, orchestra and community activities like free medical checkup, blood donation camps, charity for the poor, etc.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">Today, the Ganesh Festival is not only a popular festival, it has become a very critical and important economic activity for <span style="text-decoration: none;">Mumbai</span>, <span style="text-decoration: none;">Hyderabad</span>, <span style="text-decoration: none;">Vishakhapatnam</span>, <span style="text-decoration: none;">Bangalore</span> and <span style="text-decoration: none;">Chennai</span>. Many artists, industries, and businesses survive on this mega-event. Ganesh Festival also provides a stage for budding artists to present their art to the public. In Maharashtra, not only Hindus but many other religions also participate in the celebration like Muslims, Jains, Christian and others.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">This festival managed to re-establish the unity among the Indians during British Era.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">[Source]</span></p>
<hr />
<p>&nbsp;</p>
