---
layout: post
title: Sai Satcharita Chapter 13-15
joomla_id: 328
joomla_url: sai-satcharita-chapter-13-15
date: 2012-05-05 20:02:24.000000000 +00:00
---
<p><span style="font-family: trebuchet ms,geneva; font-size: 14pt; color: #808080;">Sai Satcharita Chapter 13-16<br /></span></p>
<hr />
<p style="text-align: center;" align="center"><span style="font-size: 14pt; line-height: 115%; font-family: 'Georgia','serif';">Shri Sai Satcharitra <span style="color: #00b050;">for</span> </span><span style="font-size: 18pt; line-height: 115%; font-family: 'Georgia','serif'; color: red;">K</span><span style="font-size: 18pt; line-height: 115%; font-family: 'Georgia','serif'; color: #0070c0;">i</span><span style="font-size: 18pt; line-height: 115%; font-family: 'Georgia','serif'; color: #ffc000;">d</span><span style="font-size: 18pt; line-height: 115%; font-family: 'Georgia','serif'; color: #002060;">s</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: book antiqua,palatino; color: #00b050; font-size: 12pt;">Chapter 13:</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: book antiqua,palatino; font-size: 12pt;">Baba’s always spoke in short phrases, but his messages were filled with meaning. He once spoke about the power of <i>maya</i>, magical power, and the power it had on the people on the world as well as Himself. He told people that if one always chanted His name, saying “Sai, Sai,” He would help them in their time of need. Baba would always be present where there was devotion. This section describes some of the <i>maya</i> that Baba has bestowed upon His devotees. </span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: book antiqua,palatino; font-size: 12pt;">Bhimaji Patil, a man from Narayanagaon in Poona, had very poor health, and suffered due to his illnesses. Although he had tried many medicines and treatments, nothing seemed to lessen his pain, until he finally thought to call on God for help. Bhimaji took a trip to Shirdi, and bowed before Baba’s feet, who said that his illness was due to his bad <i>karma</i>, or wrongdoings in his past life, and did not want to help him at first. When Bhimaji cried out in pain and asked Baba for mercy, His heart melted, and He told Bhimaji to stay in His mosque with Him. Baba cured Bhimaji, for which he was incredibly grateful, and started conducting a new puja, Sai Satya Vrata Puja, in his home every month. </span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: book antiqua,palatino; font-size: 12pt;">Baba cured many other devotees of their diseases with strange recipes, which could be attributed to clearing their <i>karma</i>. Bala Ganapat Shimpi, who suffered from Malaria, was told by Baba to give rice and curd to a black dog in front of the Laxmi temple, which cured him of his horrible disease. Bapusaheb Booty, who suffered from dysentery, and vomited profusely due to the illness. Unable to treat his disease, he went before Baba in Shirdi, and Baba told him that “the vomiting must stop.” His disease immediately stopped showing symptoms, and he felt better. A swami from Alandi once had severe pain in his ear, which would not go away even when operated on by doctors. The man came to see Baba in his mosque, who told the man that God would help him. A week later, the man wrote a letter to Baba saying that his pain had disappeared due to Baba’s words. In another instance of Baba’s words healing the sick was the time that Kaka Mahajani had severe diarrhea, and could not complete his work at Baba’s <i>masjid</i>. Baba gave Kaka some peanuts that He also shared with him, and said that everything would be okay. As always, Baba’s words were true! These are just a few of the people and sicknesses that Baba was able to ameliorate with His words, touch and blessings. </span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: book antiqua,palatino; color: #00b050; font-size: 12pt;">Chapter 14:</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: book antiqua,palatino; font-size: 12pt;">Ruttonji Shapurji Wadia, a trader who lived in Nanded, was a very rich man who was also very charitable, but was not happy because he did not have any children. After speaking with his friend, Dasganu, who was also Baba’s devotee, Ruttonji decided to go to Shirdi to seek Baba’s blessings and ask for a son. When he was able to obtain Baba’s <i>darshan</i>, he was very happy and respectfully gave Him a garland of flowers and a basket of fruits. He explained his problem to Baba, who told him that his problems would soon go away. Ruttonji was very happy, and asked Him what he could give as a <i>dakshina</i>, or gift. Baba told him that He only wanted the Rs. 5 that was remaining from the Rs. 3140 that he had already given Him. Ruttonji was surprised to hear this, since he had never been to Shirdi before, and he had not given any other <i>dakshina</i> to Baba. He gave the Rs. 5 to Baba, received His blessings, and soon returned home. When Ruttonji came home, it dawned on him that he had once received a Muslim saint in his house, and arranged for his stay, which cost exactly Rs.3410. With this incident, Ruttonji realized that Baba knew all that was going on, and was not a “normal” human being. He was soon blessed with a son, followed by three more. This story brings about the importance of <i>dakshina</i>, a gift or offering made in front of God at the time of a visit or a temple, mosque, or any religious place. Baba believed that the offering of <i>dakshina</i> made people humble, and gave them a lesson in charity. By giving away a small amount of money, Baba taught His devotees lessons of Renunciation and Purification to better their souls and their <i>karma</i>. </span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: book antiqua,palatino; color: #00b050; font-size: 12pt;">Chapter 15:</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: book antiqua,palatino; font-size: 12pt;">Baba’s fame grew mostly by word of mouth from His devotees, but the tales of his <i>leelas</i> and <i>mayas</i> were spread by Dasganu’s <i>kirtans</i>, which were stories set to the tune of a song. Dasganu traveled far and wide, singing the praises of Baba. </span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: book antiqua,palatino; font-size: 12pt;">It was one of Dasganu’s <i>kirtanas</i> that brought a man, Mr. Cholkar from Thana, to Baba. The man was very poor, and worked in the Civil Courts in Thana. After hearing Dasganu’s <i>kirtana</i>, Mr. Cholkar prayed in his mind to Baba, promising to go to Shirdi to see Him if he passed his civil exams. As the time passed, Mr. Cholkar passed his exams, but being a poor man, he couldn’t afford to make the trip to Shirdi. In order to save money for his trip, Mr. Cholkar stopped putting sugar in his food and tea. After some time, he was able to save enough money to make the trip to Shirdi, prostrate before Baba, and distribute sweets in His name. Before he left the mosque, Baba told one of His devotees to give Mr. Cholkar some tea with lots of sugar. Mr. Cholkar was very happy hearing this, realized that Baba knew of the sacrifices he had made to reach Shirdi and to see Him. Baba instilled devotion in Mr. Cholkar this way. </span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: book antiqua,palatino;"><span style="font-size: 12pt;">There is another story in which Baba instilled devotion in people. One day, when Baba was sitting in the Masjid with a devotee, a lizard made a noise. The devotee asked Baba whether this was a good or bad omen, to which Baba replied that the lizard was happy because its sister was coming to visit from out of town. The devotee was confused, but sat silently when a man from out of town appeared on horseback. When the man got down from his horse to feed it, a lizard came out of his bag and climbed on the wall. The two lizards sat together on the wall and were overjoyed. Baba glanced at the lizards, and the devotee was sure of his all-knowing presence.</span> </span></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p><span style="font-family: trebuchet ms,geneva; font-size: 14pt; color: #808080;">[Source]</span></p>
<hr />
<p>&nbsp;</p>
