---
layout: post
title: Ritual - Namakarana
joomla_id: 145
joomla_url: ritual-namakarana
date: 2012-05-05 20:02:24.000000000 +00:00
---
<p dir="ltr"><span style="font-size: 14pt;"><span style="font-family: trebuchet ms,geneva;"><b><span style="color: #000000; font-family: verdana,geneva;"><span id=":58" class="hP"><b><span style="font-size: 13.5pt; line-height: 115%;">Rituals - Namakarana (Naming Ceremony)</span></b></span></span><br /></b></span></span></p>
<hr />
<p><span style="font-family: trebuchet ms,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #808080;"><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; color: #000000;">Naming a baby is considered to be sacred and therefore is an important Hindu tradition. It involves the immediate families and also close relatives and friends. Traditionally known as Namkaran or Namakaran Sanskar, this ceremony is conducted in an elaborate form.</span></span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">The Namakarma Sanskar is usually held after the first 10 days of a baby's delivery. These 10 post-natal days are considered to be inauspicious as the mother and child are considered to be impure. After those 10 days, the house is cleaned and sanctified for the ceremony. The mother and child are bathed traditionally and are prepared for the ceremony. Relatives and close friends are invited to be a part of this occasion and bless the child. Priests are called and an elaborate ritual takes place.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">The people involved in the baby naming ceremony are the parents of the newborn, the paternal and maternal grandparents and few close relatives and friends. In <span style="text-decoration: none;">Maharashtra</span>, the paternal aunt has the honour of naming her brother's child. The child is dressed in new clothes and the mother wets the head of the baby with a bit of water as a symbol of purifying the child. The baby is then handed over to the paternal grandmother or the father who sits near the priest during the ritual. The sacred fire is lit and the priest chants sacred hymns to invoke the Gods in the heaven to bless the child.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">In <span style="text-decoration: none;">Kerala</span>, a black thread and gold chain called an <span style="text-decoration: none;">aranjanam</span> are tied around the baby's waist on the 27th day for a baby girl and on the 28th day for a baby boy. The child's eyes are lined with mayye or kanmashi (Kohl). A black spot is placed on one cheek or asymmetrically on the forehead, to ward off the evil eyes. The father whispers the chosen Hindu name in the child's right ear three times while the left ear is covered with a <span style="text-decoration: none;">betel</span> leaf. This is then repeated with the left ear. A mixture of <span style="color: #000000; text-decoration: none;">ghee</span> (melted and clarified butter) and honey is given to the infant as a base for its various foods in the future.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">According to the date and time of birth of the child, a particular letter of the Sanskrit alphabet is chosen which would prove lucky for the baby. The baby is then given a name starting with that letter. Usually the father whispers the name four times in the right ear of the baby. In <span style="text-decoration: none;">Maharashtra</span>, this is performed by the paternal aunt. The baby receives blessings from all, including the priests. An elaborate feast is organized for the priests and the guests, as a closing event of the ceremony.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">The Namakaran Sanskar is also performed on adult converts to Hinduism to mark their formal entrance into Hinduism. The convert chooses a Hindu name to declare his allegiance to Hinduism and his severance from his formal religion. A Vedic fire sacrifice is then performed and the convert writes his new name in a tray of uncooked rice.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-family: verdana,geneva; font-size: 12pt; color: #000000;">In <span style="text-decoration: none;">Maharashtra</span>, traditionally women changed their birth-name upon marriage. The new name was selected by the husband to complement his own name. For example, a groom named <span style="text-decoration: none;">Vishnu</span> would change his brides name to <span style="text-decoration: none;">Laxmi</span>, the mythological consort of Vishnu, <span style="text-decoration: none;">Ramchandra</span> would change his bride's name to <span style="text-decoration: none;">Sita</span> and so on. Usually the husband writes the new name in a plate filled with dry uncooked rice grains.</span></p>
<p style="text-align: justify; line-height: normal;"><span style="font-size: 12pt; font-family: verdana,geneva; color: #000000;">[Source]</span></p>
<hr />
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
